Fostering an atmosphere that doesn't allow for error simply
makes people defensive. They don't try things that may turn out
badly. You encourage this defensiveness when you try to systematize
the process, when you impose rigid methodologies so that staff
members are not allowed to make any of the key strategic decisions
lest they make them incorrectly. The average level of technology
may be modestly improved by any steps you take to inhibit error.
The team sociology, however, can suffer grievously.
The opposite approach would be to encourage people to make
some errors. You do this by asking your folks on occasion what
dead-end roads they've been down, and by making sure they
understand that "none" is not the best answer. When people blow
it, they should be congratulated—that's part of what they're being
paid for.

The major problems of our work are not so much
technological as sociological in nature.

The uniqueness of every worker is a continued annoyance to
the manager who has blindly adopted a management style from the
production world. The natural people manager, on the other hand,
realizes that uniqueness is what makes project chemistry vital and
effective. It's something to be cultivated.

Although your staff may be exposed to the message "Work longer
and harder" while they're at the office, they're getting a very different
message at home. The message at home is, "Life is passing you
by. Your laundry is piling up in the closet, your babies are uncuddled,
your spouse is starting to look elsewhere. There is only one time around on this merry-go-round called life, only one shot at the
brass ring. And if you use your life up on COBOL.,."

Workaholism is an illness, but not an illness like alcoholism
that affects only the unlucky few. Workaholism is more like the
common cold: Everyone has a bout of it now and then. Our purpose
in writing about it here is not so much to discuss its causes and
cures, but to address the simpler problem of how you, the manager,
ought to deal with your workaholics. If you exploit them to the hilt
in typical Spanish Theory fashion, you'll eventually lose them.

People under time pressure don't work better;
they Just work faster.
In order to work faster, they may have to sacrifice the quality
of the product and their own job satisfaction.

We managers tend to think of quality as just another attribute
of the product, something that may be supplied in varying degrees
according to the needs of the marketplace. It's like the chocolate
sauce you pour onto a homemade sundae: more for people who
want more, and less for people who want less.
The builders' view of quality, on the other hand, is very different.
Since their self-esteem is strongly tied to the quality of the
product, they tend to impose quality standards of their own. The
minimum that will satisfy them is more or less the best quality they
have achieved in the past. This is invariably a higher standard than
what the market requires and is willing to pay for.

Allowing the standard of quality to be set by the buyer, rather
than the builder, is what we call the flight from excellence. A market-
derived quality standard seems to make good sense only as long
as you ignore the effect on the builder's attitude and effectiveness.

In the long run, market-based quality costs more. The lesson
here is,
Quality, far beyond that required by the end user,
is a means to higher productivity.

Wait a minute. How is it possible that higher quality coexists
with higher productivity? That flies in the face of the common wisdom
that adding quality to a product means you pay more to build it.
For a clue, read the words of Tajima and Matsubara, two of the
most respected commentators on the Japanese phenomenon:

The trade-off between price and quality does not exist
in Japan. Rather, the idea that high quality brings on
cost reduction is widely accepted.

The decision to apply schedule pressure to a project needs to
be made in much the same way you decide whether or not to punish
your child: If your timing is impeccable so the justification is easily
apparent, then it can help. If you do it all the time, it's just a sign
that you've got troubles of your own.

Organizational busy work tends to expand to fill
the working day

You automate everything else; isn't it about time you
automated away your software development staff?
Response: This is another variation of the high-tech illusion:
the belief that software developers do easily automatable
work. Their principal work is human communication
to organize the users' expressions of needs into formal procedure.
That work will be necessary no matter how we
change the life cycle. And it's not likely to be automated.

Sharon knew what all good instinctive managers know: The
manager's function is not to make people work, but to make it possible
for people to work.

Hard as this may be to believe, some companies
actually use a public address system to interrupt perhaps thousands
of workers, people who are trying to think, in order to locate one:
BONG! [static] ATTENTION, ATTENTION! PAGING PAUL PORTULACA.
WILL PAUL PORTULACA PLEASE CALL THE PAGING CENTER.
If you position yourself well, you can sometimes see thirty or forty
salaried workers raise their heads at the initial bong and listen politely
through the whole message, then look down again wondering
what they were doing before they were interrupted.

Almost without exception, the
workspaces given to intellect workers are noisy, interruptive, unprivate,
and sterile. Some are prettier than others, but not much more
functional. No one can get any work done there. The very person
who could work like a beaver in a quiet little cubbyhole with two
large folding tables and a door that shuts is given instead an EZWhammo
Modular Cubicle with seventy-three plastic appurtenances.
Nobody shows much interest in whether it helps or hurts
effectiveness.

chapter 9
productivity:
Anything you need to quantify can be
measured In some way that Is superior to
not measuring it at all.

In order to make the concept deliver on its potential, management
has to be perceptive and secure enough to cut itself out of the
loop. That means the data on individuals is not passed up to management,
and everybody in the organization knows it. Data
collected on the individual's performance has to be used only to
benefit that individual. The measurement scheme is an exercise in
self-assessment, and only the sanitized averages are made available
to the boss.
This concept is a hard one to swallow for many managers.
They reason that they could use the data to do some aspects of their
work more effectively (precision promotion, for example, or even
precision firing). Their company has paid to have the data collected,
so why shouldn't it be made available to them? But collection of
this very sensitive data on the individual can only be effected with
the active and willing cooperation of the individual. If ever its confidentiality
is compromised, if ever the data is used against even one
individual, the entire data collection scheme will come to an abrupt
halt.
The individuals are inclined to do exactly the same things with
the data that the manager would do. They will try to improve the
things they do less well or try to specialize in the areas where they
already excel. In the extreme case, an individual may even "fire"
himself in order to stop depending on skills that have been found to
be deficient The manager doesn't really need the individual data in
order to benefit from it.

chapter 10:
People who do writing, work in design, thinking need to get into state of flow. Yet it's so elusive!

If the office space is mixed with people who answer calls, then it's a hell for minority of flow-needed workers

A few days like that and anybody is ready to look for a new
job. If you're a manager, you may be relatively unsympathetic to
the frustrations of being in no-flow. After all, you do most of your
own work in interrupt mode—that's management—but the people
who work for you need to get into flow. Anything that keeps them
from it will reduce their effectiveness and the satisfaction they take
in their work. It will also increase the cost of getting the work done.

Body time != brain time

The phenomena of flow and immersion give us a more realistic
way to model how time is applied to a development task. What
matters is not the amount of time you're present, but the amount of
time that you're -working at full potential. An hour in flow really
accomplishes something, but ten six-minute work periods sandwiched
between eleven interruptions won't accomplish anything

chapter 11: about phones
Phone was the worst invetion, cuz it abruptly breaks into the order of work!

phones vs emails. Emails are better for many things. People must learn that it's okay sometimes not to
answer their phones, and they must learn that their time—not just
the quantity but its quality—is important

chapter 12:
Many of the everyday tasks performed by professional workers
are done in the serial processing center of the left brain. Music
will not interfere particularly with this work, since it's the brain's
holistic right side that digests music. But not all of the work is cen
tered in the left brain. There is that occasional breakthrough that
makes you say "Ahah!" and steers you toward an ingenious bypass
that may save months or years of work. The creative leap involves
right-brain function. If the right brain, is busy listening to 1001
Strings on Muzak, the opportunity for a creative leap is lost.

Management, at its best, should make sure there is enough
space, enough quiet, and enough ways to ensure privacy so that
people can create their own sensible workspace. Uniformity has no
place in this view. You have to grin and bear it when people put up
odd pictures or leave their desks a mess or move the furniture
around or merge their offices. When they've got it just the way they
want it, they'll be able to put it out of their minds entirely and get on
with the work.

chapter 13:
Most monolithic corporate space can only be understood in
terms of its symbolic value to the executives who caused it to be
built This is their mark on the firmament, the lasting accomplishment
they leave behind. They gloat, "Look on my works, ye
Mighty, and despair!" Despair, of course, is exactly all you can do.
Your cubicle, infinitely repeated to the horizon, leaves you feeling
like a numbered cog. Whether it is TransAmerica's Orwellian tower
in San Francisco or AT&T's Madison Avenue mausoleum, the
result is depressingly the same: a sense of suffocation to the individual.
The master plan is an attempt to impose totalitarian order. A
single and therefore uniform vision governs the whole. In no two
places is the same function achieved differently. A side effect of the
totalitarian view is that the conceptualization of the facility is frozen
in time.

Then,, the book describes the 3 principles that must be utilized when making more efficient spaces. People who work closely, should have a way to form their own semiprivate space, actual working space w\o disturbing others.

the room plans are shown from the above.

The patterns that crop up again and again in successful space are
there because they are in fundamental accord with characteristics of
the human creature. They allow him to function as a human. They
emphasize his essence—he is at once an individual and a member of
a group. They deny neither his individuality nor his inclination to
bond into teams. They let him be what he is.

You don't have to solve the space problem for the whole
institution. If you can solve it just for your own people, you're way
ahead. And if your group is more productive and has lower
turnover, that just proves you're a better manager.
It almost always makes sense to move a project or work group
out of corporate space. Work conducted in ad hoc space has got
more energy and a higher success rate. People suffer less from
noise and interruption and frustration. The quirky nature of their
space helps them form a group identity. If you are part of the lofty
reaches of upper management, then decide which projects matter
most. Move the key ones out.

part 3

Parents do have a shaping effect
on their children over the years, and individuals can obviously bring
about huge changes in themselves. But managers are unlikely to
change their people in any meaningful way. People usually don't
stay put long enough, and the manager just doesn't have enough
leverage to make a difference in their nature. So the people who
work for you through whatever period will be more or less the same
at the end as they were at the beginning. If they're not right for the
job from the start, they never will be.

The insiders in question—typically second- and third-level
managers with shaky self-confidence—are uncomfortable with any
kind of behavior that is different from average. They need to impose
safely homogenized mores on those beneath them to demonstrate
that they are in charge.

Corporate Entropy
Entropy is levemess or sameness. The more it increases, the less
potential there is to generate energy or do work. In the corporation
or other organization, entropy can be thought of as uniformity of
attitude, appearance, and thought process. Just as thermodynamic
entropy is always increasing in the universe, so too corporate
entropy is on the rise:

SECOND THERMODYNAMIC LAW OF MANAGEMENT:
Entropy is always increasing in the organization.
That's why most elderly institutions are tighter and a lot less fun
than sprightly young companies.
There is not much you can do about this as a global phenomenon,
but you've got to fight it within your own domain. The
most successful manager is the one who shakes up the local entropy
to bring in the right people and let them be themselves, even though
they may deviate from the corporate norm. Your organization may
have rigor mortis, but your little piece of it can hop and skip.

chapter 15
hiring a juggler

do auditions to assess candidate's ability to blend with the rest of the team. This can quickly assess his ability to communicate

chapter 16
By the end of a few months, the new person is doing some
useful work; within five months, he or she is at full working
capacity. A reasonable assessment of startup cost is therefore
approximately three lost work-months per new hire. (Obviously,
the startup cost is worse or much worse to the extent that the work
to be performed is highly esoteric.) The total cost of replacing each
person is the equivalent of four-and-a-half to five months of
employee cost or about twenty percent of the cost of keeping that
employee for the full two years on the job.

The hidden cost of turnover:
Employee turnover costs about twenty percent of all manpower
expense. But that's only the visible cost of turnover. There is an
ugly invisible cost that can be far worse.
In companies with high turnover, people tend toward a
destructively short-term viewpoint, because they know they just
aren't going to be there very long.

Again, one can prove that retraining is not the cheapest way to
fill a new slot. It's always cheaper in the short run to fire the person
who needs retraining and hire someone else who already has the
required skills. Most organizations do just that. The best organizations
do not. They realize that retraining helps to build the mentality
of permanence that results in low turnover and a strong sense
of community. They realize that it more than justifies its cost.

Methodology
In Australia, where striking uses up nearly as much labor time
as working, there is a charming form of strike called work to rule.
Rather than walk off the job, workers open up a fat book of procedures
and announce, "Until you give us what we're asking for,
we're going to work exactly to the rule." When the air traffic controllers
do this, for instance, they can only land one plane every
seven minutes. If doctors were to do it, an appendectomy would
take a week. Introduction of a Methodology opens up the possibility
of work-to-rule actions in still more parts of the economy.
People might actually do exactly what the Methodology says, and
the work would grind nearly to a halt.

chapter 18
A jelled team is a group of people so strongly knit that the whole is
greater than the sum of the parts. The production of such a team is
greater than that of the same people working in unjelled form. Just
as important, the enjoyment that people derive from their work is
greater than what you'd expect given the nature of the work itself.
In some cases, jelled teams working on assignments that others
would declare downright dull have a simply marvelous time

I once ran a telecommunications project for a large
consumer finance company. This organization was in
the business of lending money to poor people at outlandishly
high rates of interest, a business that is
illegal in twenty-three states. Increasing the company's
already huge profit was not something the average
worker could easily identify with but management
seemed to think it was. A delegation came to talk to me
late one Friday afternoon. The company's chances for
the best second quarter in history were in our hands,
they said. They asked me to share this fact with the
rest of the team, "to focus their efforts." I had never
worked on a more focused team in my life, but I dutifully
passed the word on the next morning. (They were
so fired up that the whole team was in, even though it
was a Saturday). The energy went out of the team like
wind out of a sail. The chief programmer summed it all
up, "Who gives a rat's ass for their second quarter?"
Half an hour later, they'd all gone home.

Jelled teams are usually marked by a strong sense of identity.
The teams you hear discussed in the industry have colorful names:
the "Okie Coders" at General Electric, or the "Gang of Four" at
DuPont, or the "Chaos Group" at Cincinnati Gas & Electric.
Teammates may all use the same catch phrases and share many injokes.
There may be obvious team space. The teams may congregate
at lunch or hang out at the same watering hole after work.
There is a sense ofeliteness on a good team. Team members
feel they're part of something unique. They feel they're better than
the run of the mill. They have a cocky, SWAT Team attitude that
may be faintly annoying to people who aren't part of the group.
There is invariably a feeling of joint ownership of the product
built by the jelled team. Participants are pleased to have their names
grouped together on a product or a part of one. The individual is
eager for peer review. The team space is decorated with views of
the product as it approaches completion.
The final sign of a jelled team is the obvious enjoyment that
people take in their work. Jelled teams just feel healthy. The interactions
are easy and confident and warm

chapter 19:
the black team - example of jelled team

The Black Team was initially made up of people who had
proved themselves to be slightly better at testing than their peers.
They were slightly more motivated. They also were testing code
that had been written by someone else, so they were free of the cognitive
dissonance that hampers developers when testing their own
programs. All in all, those who formed the team might have
expected it to achieve at least a modest improvement in product
quality, but they didn't expect more than that. What they got was
much more than that.
The most surprising thing about the Black Team was not how
good it was at the beginning, but how much it improved during the
next year. Some magic was happening: The team was forming a
personality of its own. This personality was being shaped by an
adversary philosophy of testing that evolved among group members,
a philosophy that they had to want and expect to find defects.
They weren't rooting for the developers at all, quite the opposite.
They were delighting in submitting the program (and the programmer)
to a sequence that was not just a test, but an ordeal

At first it was simply a joke that the tests they ran were mean and
nasty, and that the team members actually loved to make your code
fail. Then it wasn't a joke at all. They began to cultivate an image
of destroyers. What they destroyed was not only your code but
your whole day. They did monstrously unfair things to elicit failure,
overloading the buffers, comparing empty files, and keying in
outrageous input sequences. Grown men and women were reduced
to tears by watching their programs misbehave under the demented
handling of these fiends. The worse they made you feel, the more
they enjoyed it.
Needless to say, the company was delighted. Every defect the
team found was one that the customers wouldn't find. The team
was a success. It succeeded as a test group, but more important for
our purposes here, it succeeded as a social unit. People on the team
got such a kick out of what they were doing that colleagues outside
the team were positively jealous. The black outfits and the silly
exaggerated behavior were part of the fun, but there was something
much more fundamental going on. The chemistry within the group
had become an end in itself.

chapter 20:
teamicide

Back to brainstorming mode: We began looking for "Six
Things You Can Do to Make Team Formation Possible." It was still
hard. At last, in desperation, we tried a trick called inversion,
described in Edward deBono's Lateral Thinking. When you're
stuck trying to solve a problem, deBono suggests that rather than
looking for ways to achieve your goal, look for ways to achieve the
exact opposite of your goal. This can have the effect of clearing
away the brain's cobwebs that keep you from being creative. So
instead of looking for ways to make team formation possible, we
began to think of ways to make it impossible. That was easy. In no
time at all, we came up with lots of sure-fire ways to inhibit the formation
of teams and disrupt project sociology. These measures,
taken together, constitute a strategy we dubbed teamicide. Our short
list of teamicide techniques is presented below:

defensive management
• bureaucracy
• physical separation
• fragmentation of people' s time
• quality reduction of the product
• phony deadlines
• clique control

Maybe phony deadlines used to work. Maybe there were once
workers so naive that they actually believed what they heard. When
the boss said the job "reeely reeely has to be done by January,"
maybe they just accepted it and buckled down. Maybe. But it certainly
doesn't work that way anymore. The people on your staff will
know if they're being bamboozled. If you say the product absolutely
has to be out the door by some arbitrary date, they will ask,
"Why? Will the universe grind to a halt if we're late? Will the company
fold? Will the nation slide into the sea? Will Western
Civilization break down?"
In the typical phony deadline spiel, the manager announces
that the work must be done on such and such a date. The date mentioned
is impossible to meet, and everyone knows it. The effort will
certainly slip (so much for the idea that the deadline is absolute).
The work has been defined in such a way that success is impossible.
The message to the workers is clear: The boss is a Parkinsonian
robot with no respect or concern for them. The boss believes they
won't do a stroke of work except under duress. Don't expect a
jelled team on that project.

chapter 21:
Presented this way, the spaghetti dinner may seem like a contrivance
on the manager's part. But it probably wasn't and wouldn't
have seemed like it had you been there. If you had asked the manager
in question what she had in mind for the evening, she would
have probably replied in total sincerity, "Dinner." A natural manager
has got a subconscious feel for what's good for the team. This
feel may govern decisions throughout the project. The entire
experience is organized for small, easy joint successes. You have to
look twice to see the manager's hand in any of this, it just seems to
be happening.
Variations on the story of the spaghetti dinner have been told
to us in different forms and about different managers for years. The
common thread is that good managers provide frequent easy opportunities
for the team to succeed together. The opportunities may be
tiny pilot sub-projects, or demonstrations, or simulations, anything
that gets the team quickly into the habit of succeeding together. The
best success is the one in which there is no evident management, in
which the team works as a genial aggregation of peers.

chapter 22:
One of our clients tried to cancel a product that was judged to
have no market. Cooler heads prevailed and the product was built.
It became a huge success. The manager who had unsuccessfully
tried to kill the project (he now had become president of the whole
company) ordered a medal for the team, with the citation "First
Annual Prize for Insubordination." He presented it with a speech,
stating that others seeking the award had better be just as successful.
Being an insubordinate failure wouldn't get anybody a prize.
People at all levels know whether some sensible insubordination
is acceptable or not. People look out for their Open Kimono
managers. They're determined to make them look good, even
though the managers may botch an occasional decision. Defensive
managers are on their own.

chapter 23:
Presented below is an admittedly simplistic list of the elements
of a chemistry-building strategy for a healthy organization:
• Make a cult of quality.
• Provide lots of satisfying closure.
• Build a sense of eliteness.
• Allow and encourage heterogeneity.
• Preserve and protect successful teams.
• Provide strategic but not tactical direction

chapter 24:

chapter 25:

free electrons - is the name for independent contractors, free lancers that actually know better  whawt is good for company. They develop a feeling of ownership of the company, cuz they have more freedom.
The mark of the best manager is an ability to single out the
few key spirits who have the proper mix of perspective and maturity
and then turn them loose. Such a manager knows that he or
she really can't give direction to these natural free electrons.
They have progressed to the point where their own direction is
more unerringly in the best interest of the organization than any
direction that might come down from above. It's time to get out
of their way.

chapter 26:
when the issue becomes intolerable like noisy, unprodctive environment, bad management and workers are realizing it, it does not take much effort to awaken this sleeping giant of wrath.
So go ahead and raise the people, raise the collective voice!

chapter 27:

Extended overtime is a productivity-reduction technique,
anyway. The extra hours are almost always more than offset by
the negative side effects. This is true even if you don't consider
the disruption of the team. When you take into account the way
that the team members' differing abilities to work overtime tends
to destroy teams, the case against it becomes persuasive.
Most managers have at least a suspicion that overtime doesn't
help, that projects that work a lot of overtime are not much of a
credit to their managers' skills and talents. But they end up allowing
or encouraging overtime, anyway. Why is this? Jerry
Weinberg has an answer of sorts: He suggests that we don't work
overtime so much to get the work done on time as to shield ourselves
from blame when the work inevitably doesn't get done on
tune.

chapter 28:

people hate change. As Nicolo Makiavelli put out:
"For the introducer has all those who benefit from the old
orders as enemies, and he has lukewarm defenders in all those who
might benefit from the new orders." Notice the equation is unbalanced
against change. While you risk making enemies of those
who have mastered the old ways—you are forcing them back to
the uncomfortable position of novice—you receive only minor
support from those who would gain. Why is that? Why are those
who stand most to gain from the change still half-hearted in their
support? That's because people hate change. When we start out
to change, it is never certain that we will succeed. And the uncertainty
is more compelling than the potential for gain.

Here is something to repeat to yourself whenever
you set out to ask people to change:
MANTRA: The fundamental response to change is not
logical, but emotional.
As systems developers, we have selected ourselves into the
world of cool, calming, rational thought. Either our code compiles,
or it doesn't. The compiler is never happy for us, nor mad
at us. Perhaps this is why we tend to apply logic as our main
device for resolving disputes.
chapter 31:

Unfortunately, Personnel is fresh out of experts with
Louise's grasp of the requirements, the technology, the domain,
and the people involved. "How about a Ralph?" your contact
suggests. You have never heard of Ralph, nor has anyone else on
the team, but he seems to be the only game in town, so you agree.
The deal is done. Louise leaves on the thirty-first, and Ralph
moves in the next day.
In one sense, the project has experienced no disruption at
all. You had five people on the thirty-first, and you've got five
people again on the first. If Ralph earns about the same as
Louise, the company is dutifully buying people-time for you at
the same rate as last month, and the team will be supplied with
precisely five person-months this month, exactly as it would have
been if Louise had stayed on. If the project was on-schedule last
month, it should still be on-schedule now.

Well, let's look at how Ralph spends his first day with the
company. There was a certain amount of database work remaining
that Louise left on her plate when she departed; how much
does Ralph chip away of that remaining work on Day One? Of
course, the answer is Nothing. He doesn't do squat. He spends
the whole day filling out forms for his health insurance, learning
how to order-in lunch, getting his supplies, configuring his workstation,
and having his PC connected to the network. His net production
is zero. Whoops, it may even be less than zero. If he
uses up any of the other people's time—and you know he is going
to, just to get his basic questions answered—then his net contribution
to team production for the day will be negative.
Okay, that's Day One; how about Day Two? Day Two is a
little better. He is now fully involved, reading the notes that
Louise left for him. This is work that Louise wouldn't have had
to do herself had she stayed on, since she knew all that stuff cold

(She wouldn't have had to write the notes either if she hadn't
been about to leave.) Ralph's production rate is still far lower
than Louise's would have been. He may still have a negative
effect, since he is still likely to need help from the rest of the
team, using up time that team members would have applied to the
work had they not had Ralph to support.
Eventually, your new teammate is completely up to speed,
producing at more or less the same rate that Louise did. Real productivity
of the database worker position over time looks something
like this:

The shaded area on the graph represents the lost production
(work that didn't get done) caused by Louise's departure. Or,
viewed differently, it is the investment that the company is now
making to get Ralph up where Louise was after the company's
past investments in her skills and capabilities.
We could put a dollar figure on the shaded area based on
how much the organization had to pay for time that wasn't productive.
If it takes Ralph six months to get up to speed and his
progress is essentially linear, then the investment is approximately
half the total time—that is, three person-months of effort. The
dollar figure for this investment is whatever the company pays
Ralph for salary and overhead during three months

The key question about organizational learning is not how it is
done but where. When an organization changes itself as much as
the Amazon.com example suggests, there has to be a small but
active learning center that conceives of, designs, and directs the
change. (This kind of ambitious change can't be invented by a
committee or by the organization as a whole.) The locus of early
change activity—the learning—has to be located somewhere on
the organization chart. Where?
It's tempting to say that it happens at the top. But tops of
organizations, in our experience, are not so much focused on dayto-
day operations. Presidents of large- to medium-size companies,
for example, may spend most of their time making acquisitions
(or fighting them off).
chapter 33:

The ultimate management sin is wasting people's time. It
sounds like this should be an easy sin to avoid, but it isn't. You
have some needs of your own as a manager, and these needs may
run squarely against your intention to preserve and use wisely the
time of the people working under you.
chapter 34:
An organization that succeeds in building a satisfying community
tends to keep its people. When the sense of community is strong
enough, no one wants to leave. The investment made in human
capital is thus retained, and upper management finds itself willing
to invest more. When the company invests more in its people, the
people perform better and feel better about themselves and about
their company. This makes them still less likely to move on. The
positive reinforcement here is all to the good.
Of course, even the best sense of on-the-job community
doesn't assure that you will keep all your people forever. Some
will know they have to leave to advance their own careers or for
whatever other reason. However, when people do leave such an
organization, they tend to time their departures to minimally
inconvenience the community. This is an extraordinary boon to
anyone doing project work, since it means that workers are
unlikely to leave during the project. This effect alone, of departing
only at project end, is worth more than all the process
improvement your organization is likely to make over the next
decade.

So far, we've discussed only the tangible, dollars-and-cents
benefits. There is an intangible at work here, too, one that's liable
to have even more significance to you than all the rest. To consider
it, cast your mind forward, just for a moment, to that day in the
distant future, when you are about to cash in your chips. You're
on your deathbed at the grand old age of, let's say, a hundred and
one. You're in no great discomfort, only old. At this age, your

thoughts are all in the past. You're taking stock. You ask yourself
the question, What really mattered in my life and what didn't? It's
no great surprise that many of the concerns that utterly obsessed
you all those years ago (for example, getting that humongous version
27 build of WhizBang v6.1.1 to stabilize) don't figure very
prominently in your deathbed assessment. No, you're much more
likely to think about warm family relations, kids and grandkids,
the house and all its memories. Any contribution from your
work? Well, sure, it was nice to be part of the coming-of-age of
the Information Era. It was good to rise to the top of a company,
or nearly to the top, to have your chance at setting directions.
That was nice. But don't forget that you also succeeded at creating
a real community within that company, something that people
loved and respected and gave their allegiance to. Now, that was
an accomplishment. That's got to figure very prominently in your
sense of what you have done with your life. The pleasure you
take from that—-like the pleasure that Michelangelo must have
felt, mulling over his contributions—need have no very strong
connection to their cash value at the time. This was a creation.
This was Art, you tell yourself, and the person who made it happen was an Artist.
